Topics of css

A. In how many ways can we specify the CSS styles for the HTML element

    1. inline
    2. Internal
    3. External

B. Types of selector

    1. Element selctor
    2. id selector
    3. class selector

Id selctor is used , when aplly a css on particular element differnt from other element we use id selector , for unique

and we cannot use multiple id

priority in selector maximmun priority is of Id > class > element

C. InCSS Colors can be specified using

    1. predefined color name
    2. RGB
    3. RGBA
    4. HEX
    5. HSL
    6. HSLA

Basic color are Red, green ,blue
rgb(red,green,blue)
color value between 0 to 255
Black :rgb(0,0,0)
White: rgb(255,255,255)
Red ; rgb(255,0,0)
Green : rgb(0,255,0)
Blue: rgb(0,0,255)

RGBA
rgba(red,green,blue,alpha) :aplha is used for opacity
alpha parameter is a number between 0.0(fully transparent) and 1.0(not transparent at all)

HEX
#rrggbb
rr(red),gg(green),(blue)
value between 00 to ff

HSL
hsl(hue,saturation,lightness)
hue is a degree on the color wheel from 0 to 360. 0 is red ,120 is green and 240 is blue.
Saturation is percentage value,0% means a shade of gray , and 100% is full color
Lightness is also percentage, 0% is black , 50% is neither light or dark,100% is light
Red:hsl(0,100%,50%)

HSLA
hsla(hua,,saturation,lightness,alpha)

D. Background

    Background position is used set aposition of backgrond image we will give in px , %
    is we want background ill not scroll but content will scroll then use background-attachment by default -scroll
    Shorthard background:color url() repeat attachment poisition
    if we want multiple image in background we cane use it like url(),url()
    and apply position

E. Border

if we uapply differnet property on 4 side then use
top Reight bottom left sequence
if we style particular side then use
border-top-style
border-bottom-style
...etc
koi bhi kisi bhi trh se agr 4 side set krni squence use krna chahye with any property

F. Height and Width

height and width will be set according to the parent
if we don't know parent then we can use
max-width
min-height
min-width
max-heigth
if we define
max and min widht and height and we also define width and height then it will apply according to the min and mas width and heigth and parent dimension

G. Padding

H. Margin

    margin collpase if we provide from top 20px and bottom 50px , it does not means total gap will be 70px ,
    total gap will be 50px , why?
    jo dono mein bda hoga wog aayega , and this is called margin collapase

    if top and bottom margin collapase kr rhe honge tbhi hoga , but left or right ke saath nhi hoga

part 12: Box Model

    if we want to calculate the box then we calculate
    content (width+height) + padding(both side) + border(width) + margin

    when you set the width and height properties of an element with css , you just set the width and height of the content area. to calculate the full size of an element, you must also add padding , borders and margins.

    total element width = width + left padding + right padding + left border + right border + left margin + right margin

    totak element height = height + top padding + botto padding + top border + right border + top margin + bottom margin

part 13: Text :

    text direction is left to right and defualt direction is also left to right
    if you are working another language for example urdu then you define direction
    direction:rtl .

    if we added img in between paragradh and wewnt agin it we will apply vertical align on that img
    vertical=algin:model

    if we set line-height: 0px then it will overlap the line.

    if we are munnaual apply word spacing by defualt html convert into single spacing , if we do that then use pre tag or br

    we can also apply shadow on text ,
    text-shadow : horizontal shadow , vertical shadow blur color shadow

    horizontal shadow means kitni durr hogi
    vertical shadow means kitni durr hogi

    how to write vertically in box:
    writing-mode: vertical-rl;

part 14: Link:

    link is in 4 state
    1. link
    2. :visited
    3. :hover
    4. :active

    if we use sinlgye state we can use normally but use all 4 or 3 then sequnce is
    link => :visted => :hover => :active

part 15: font:

        font-size
        font-wieght:
        font-style
        font-variant: small-caps; is convert the text in uppercase but height of that charater is same

        font-shorthand : style varinant wight size family

        The font is set to italic and bold, the font size is set to 12 pixels, the line height is set to 30 pixels, and the font family is Georgia

part:16 CSS Unit:

    we use length in width , height, margin,padding, font-size

    there are two type of unit in css

    1. Absolute
    2. Relative

    Absolute means it will not depend
    relateive it will depend

    Absolute unit in CSS
    CM
    Mm
    Inch
    Px (1inch=96px)
    Pt (1inch = 72px)
    Pc (1pc=12pt)

    Relative Unit inCSS

    Em -em is relative to the size of its direct parent
    Rem - rem is only relative to root html tag size
    Vh - 1% of view port heigth
    Vw - 1% of view port width
    % - reative to parent

    em means that for eg if parent pr 2px we want uska size duble the we apply by *2 then it check to parent 2*2=4px , 0.5*2= 1px

    if we want to change font size according to screen size than use vw,vh

part 17: Cursor:

part 18 :Box Shadow:

    box-shadow : x-aix y-axis blur-radius spread color inset/outset
    -px represnt negative axis

part 19: Opacity

part 20 :filter:

part 21 : imageSprite : dubara se krna hai

part 22: Gradient :

    liner-gradient(to direction(bttom right) , green , blue, red

    background-image: linear-gradient(to bottom right, black, gray);

    background-image: linear-gradient(160deg, black, gray, black);

    background-image: radial-gradient(circle, green 20%, blue 30%, red 50%);)

part 23 : overflow:

    first yh block element pr lgta hai and height speecific hoga tb
    wrna div accroding to the item item automatically adjust height

part 24 : Resizeable :

    if wna t create div ito resze then use resize

    fo example : textare it have resize property if we want it will not resize then use resize-none

    contnent hona jarurri ai blank nhi hona chahiye

part 25: list:

    list-style-image: url("image url");
    line-height-step: ;
    list-style-type: decimal-leading-zero;
    border: 1px solid black;
    list-style-position: inside;

part 26: table:

tr pr border in algta

part 27 Function:

    calc
    clamp is used add min-width ideal max-width
    for eg: width :clamp(200px, 100%, 800px)
    repeat
    var is used to use root property aas value
    for eg :root{
    --primary-color:teal;
    --btn-color:red;
    --text-color:white
    }

part 28: box-sizing: by default content-box

    1.content-box
    2.border-box

    border mein contnet , border, padding ussi mein aajata hai out and margin space leti hai

part 29: pseudo-classses & pseudo-element dubara cover krna hai

part 30 :display and visibility

    display
        inline-block
        inline
        block
        none

part 31 Position:

    1. static
    2. fixed
    3. absolute
    4. relative

    5. top
    6. bottom
    7. left
    8. right

    top bottom left right  tbhi kaam kregi jb position define hogi wrna nhi

    relative apne purani positon  ke according set hota hai, and relative apni purani jgh pr kisko ane bhi nhi deta. by default 0 hota hai sb.

    absolute agr parent position element hai means usmein position defin except static then set according to the parent, is parents are not position element then it will be set according to the body , absolute in purni jgh pr next element aata hai but absolute mein woh pni jgh chor dega , chahe woh kiske bhi relative set ho.

    fixed view port ke hisab se work krta hai , absolute ki trh nhi hai but ek similatrity ki woh apni jgh chor deta hai

part 32: layers and z-index

    z-index tbhi kaam krni jb humne position set kr rkhi hi

part 33: Float and Clear

    float use move left or right some thing
    clear is used sclear the space ki ap uske right/left/both mein nhi rh skte
    clear dono element mein lg skte hai float hai bhi ya nhi bhi

    jisko apne apko adjust krni krna hota us pr clear lgta hai

part 34 2DTranform

    1. rotate
    2. move
    3. scale

    4. inline element ke saath kaam nhi krta hai

    The transform CSS property lets you rotate, scale, skew, or translate an element. It modifies the coordinate space of the CSS visual formatting model.

    transform: scale(0.8, 0.7); scal emin width or height krte hai value multiply ho jta hai hai

part 34: Transition
shorthand

    transition: property, duration transition-timing-function, delay;

part 35 :Responsive Web site :

    1. view port meta data
    2. media query

    @media screen and (min-width:400px) and (max-width:768px){

        // write css here

    }

    Attribute Selector :
    a[href=""]{

    }

    Universal Selector
    \*{

    }

    Combinator Selector
    descendant selector (space) child at any space
    child selector (>) direct child
    adjacent sibling selector (+) right after sibing At same level
    general sibling selector (~) all sibling

General Rule

!important will override every thing
Inline can override everything except !important
External will work according to specificy

Specificity Rule

(#) id selctor has highest value
(\*) Universal Selector has lowest value

if same rule written two or more times in external sheet then last rule will be applicable

Multiple column:

part-49 FlexBox:

    noraml flex adjust the width if we specify in parent element if want child element take exact width we define then we use flex-wrap:wrap

part50: CSS-grid

flex is work in one direction at a time but
grid will work in both direction , so then flexibilty will increses

Grid works for 2dimensional aligmant
Flexbox is good for spacing
